Here is a clear, simple, interview-friendly explanation of Compilation Time vs Runtime:
✅ Compilation Time (Compile Time)
Compilation time is the phase before your program starts running.
It is when the code is checked and prepared by the engine (or compiler).

✔ What Happens at Compilation Time?
Syntax checking, Hoisting, Memory allocation for variables and functions, Creation of execution context (in JS), Scope resolution, Function declarations are stored

Errors like syntax errors are caught
✔ Example (JS):
console.log(a); // undefined (not error)
var a = 5;


Why?
Because during compile time, JS hoists var a.

✅ Runtime (Execution Time)
Runtime is the phase when the code is actually executed line by line.

✔ What Happens at Runtime?
1. Code runs line-by-line, Variables get assigned actual values, Functions get executed
2. Errors like: TypeError, ReferenceError (in some cases), Runtime exceptions
3. DOM manipulation
4. API calls
5. Loops & conditions execute

✔ Example:
console.log(x); // ❌ ReferenceError: x is not defined
console.log("Hello");


Here x was never declared, so runtime throws an error.

🔥 Simple Analogy
Phase	                   Meaning
Compilation Time	       Checking and preparing the recipe before cooking
Runtime	                   Actual cooking happens


🔥 Key Differences (Quick Table)
Feature	          Compilation Time	         Runtime
When?	          Before execution	         During execution
Errors detected	  Syntax, scope, hoisting	 TypeError, ReferenceError, logical errors
JS Actions	      Hoisting, scope creation	 Value assignments, function calls
Code runs?	      ❌ No	                     ✔ Yes
Memory	          Allocates space for         Updates values, manages call stack
                  variables/functions	


🧠 JS Special Notes
1. JavaScript is not fully compiled like C++ or Java.
2. It uses Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation + interpretation.

Still, JS has a compile phase where:
Hoisting happens, Scope is created, Syntax is analyzed

🎯 Short Interview Answer
1. Compilation time is when the JS engine scans the code, performs hoisting, allocates memory, and checks syntax.
2. Runtime is when the code executes line-by-line, variables get values, functions run, and runtime errors occur.